POAF Notes

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9017863/

Post-operative atrial fibrillation (POAF) is a persistent and serious surgical complication that occur in 20-55% of cardiac surgery cases. Patients have a 2-fold increase in mortality risk and spend about 3.7 more days in the hospital and $16,000 more in medical costs during their visit. 

Patients have a 2-fold increase in mortality risk and spend about 3.7 more days in the hospital and $16,000 more in medical costs during their visit. 

Current mechanisms that are postulated to contribute to POAF include an increase in sympathetic tone, oxidative stress, local and systemic inflammation, a trigger that induces atrial substrate changes, a driver to sustain POAF, and electrolyte disturbances such as hypomagnesemia.

current risk factors include age, male sex, history of myocardial infarction or heart failure, hypertension, diabetes, obesity, and COPD.

Treatments mostly include prophylaxis of repurposed drugs such as beta-blockers, statins, oral anticoagulants, antiarrhythmics, and Vitamin D and electrolyte supplementation. Autonomic denervation has also been a promising preventative measure for patients undergoing cardiac surgery.

The risk for AFib increases with age. High blood pressure, the risk for which also increases with advancing age, accounts for about 1 in 5 cases of AFib.4

In about 90% of patients who develop POAF it occurs within the first six days post operation, corresponding with the peak of the postoperative systemic inflammation response

Post-operative atrial fibrillation typically presents differently from other forms of AF. POAF typically develops within the first 6 days post-operation and then returns to normal sinus rhythm. 

POAF usually require a trigger and a vulnerable atrial substrate change, typically originating from the pulmonary veins and other atrial locations

If POAF is caused by local or systemic inflammation, why do drugs that decrease the levels and activity of inflammatory markers lead to a significantly increased risk of atrial fibrillation?

Pain, especially unrelieved pain, could be a trigger for atrial fibrillation. 

findings from this study suggest no association between opioid use and atrial fibrillation and delirium.

In a recent study 43% of patients developed POAF and showed increased post-operative fluid balance and M-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-ProBNP). Also, anemia pre-operation led to increased transfusion volumes, and suggests that POAF may be triggered by global cardiac strain 

Risk factors for AFib include
    Advancing age
    High blood pressure
    Obesity
    European ancestry
    Diabetes
    Heart failure
    Ischemic heart disease
    Hyperthyroidism
    Chronic kidney disease
    Moderate to heavy alcohol use
    Smoking
    Enlargement of the chambers on the left side of the heart

Hypomagnesemia is a common feature post-surgery and has been shown to be a biomarker for predicting POAF.In the Framingham Heart Study, it was shown low magnesium level after cardiac surgery was an indication for the onset of POAF 

treating patients prophylactically with magnesium in the post-operative period only led to a statistically significant decrease in POAF [25], suggesting the use of intravenous magnesium as an alternative to prevent POAF. However, careful randomized clinical studies are required to determine the safety and duration of effect.

patients who undergo combined surgeries, such as a combined valve and coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgeries, are twice as likely to develop POAF, up to 60% 

the type of surgery and length of the surgery are shown to be significantly correlated with the onset of POAF

Pre-existing cardiac conditions that predispose patients to POAF. Interpreted from Yamashita et al. (2019).
                    	Risk Increase for POAF	        Odds Ratio
Hypertension	        29%	                            1.29 (95% CI: 1.12 to 1.49)
Diabetes	            6%	                            1.06 (95% CI: 1.00 to 1.13)
COPD	                36%	                            1.36 (95% CI: 1.13 to 1.64)
Heart Failure	        56%	                            1.56 (95% CI: 1.31 to 1.86)
Myocardial Infarction	18%	                            1.18 (95% CI: 1.05 to 1.34)

Increasing age has a strong correlation with the onset of POAF. 

Some studies have suggested that male sex is an independent risk factor for developing POAF, however there is conflict in the literature.

(use weights for different factors. race is low, since studies have used larger sample of caucasian than non white test subjects)

patients with a high BMI or obesity showed to have a significantly increased risk of developing POAF than patients without these risk factors (p = 0.006) 

score using the combination of variables with higher predictive value included in the POAF (COM-AF - https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8617386/) has been reported to be more useful for predicting POAF development

2.3. Methods for Reducing POAF Incidence

2.3.1. β-Blockers:-

β-Blockers prophylaxis before cardiac surgery has been shown to be one of the most effective treatments for POAF so far
In a study using β-Blockers in combination with Amiodarone, there was a 13.75% decrease in the onset of POAF with an onset frequency of 17.50% compared to β-Blockers alone at 31.25% as shown in figure 1. 
Although effective against POAF and granted a Class I indication, β-Blockers can lead to a variety of adverse outcomes, most commonly bradycardia and hypotension

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/core/lw/2.0/html/tileshop_pmc/tileshop_pmc_inline.html?title=Click on image to zoom&p=PMC3&id=9017863_nihms-1794799-f0001.jpg

2.3.2. Amiodarone:-
one of the most effective treatments for POAF
However, amiodarone presents with serious cardiac and extracardiac adverse risks, such as bradycardia, increased liver enzymes, hyperthyroidism, thyrotoxicosis, and interstitial pneumonitis. Accumulation of the drug may also lead to longer lasting side effects after discontinuing the drug
Local epicardial application of amiodarone hydrogel has been shown to reduce the adverse outcomes of amiodarone and have a decrease in POAF incidence from 22-37% to 3.3-8%

2.3.3. Statin Therapy:-
multiple meta-analyses have shown that statins are effective at preventing POAF in patients undergoing CABG, with Atorvastatin showing effectiveness instead of Rosuvastatin

2.3.4. Oral Anticoagulants:-

2.3.5 Vit D supplementation:-
In multiple studies, supplementation with Vitamin D lowered the prevalence of POAF via RAAS inhibition 

2.3.6. Magnesium Supplementation:-
Supplementation with Mg significantly increases the refractory period of atrial repolarization. The proposed mechanism for hypomagnesium contributing to POAF is due to dilution from transfusion during surgery
meta-analysis showed that post-operative magnesium supplementation was the only time frame that significantly reduced the risk of POAF

2.3.7 Autonomic Denervation:-

2.3.8 Opting for Minimally Invasive Cardiac Surgery:-


Competition:-
RAPID AI - https://www.rapidai.com/about
